Prepare methods for ACM - BCB (#939)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/60.methods.md

## An Open-Publishing Response to an Infodemic

### ABSTRACT

In an effort to keep pace as new information about COVID-19 and SARS-CoV-2 becomes available, this project is an open, collaborative effort that invited contributions from the scientific community broadly, similar to previous efforts to develop collaborative reviews [@doi:10.1098/rsif.2017.0387; @url:https://greenelab.github.io/deep-review].

> ### CCS CONCEPTS

Reviewer: Does this refer to https://dl.acm.org/ccs?

Author: It was listed as a required section of the manuscript, but that's also what I found when I looked it up! @mprobson any thoughts?

Reviewer 2: > Does this refer to https://dl.acm.org/ccs?

Yes. We'll select topics and it will auto-generate code to put here.

> <!--To Do: @mprobson, do you want to take the lead on this?-->

Reviewer 2: Sure!

The potential for "excessive publication" has been identified as an issue for over forty years, and was one concern about the move towards electronic, rather than print, publishing at the turn of the millennium [@doi:10/d3bmnv].
<!--To Do: Flesh out-->

<!-- To Do: This is just an outline, formalize this paragraph with citations etc-->
While some of this information has been disseminated by traditional publishing mechanisms, in other cases, it is made public through preprint servers or even press releases.
Preprints provide a venue for scientists to release findings rapidly, but have both the advantage and disadvantage of making research available before it has undergone the peer review process.
Media outlets don't always report on this accurately.
Additionally, many papers are being retracted.
These include both preprints and papers that are published in more traditional venues.
The large number of retractions may also be influenced by the fact that the time from submission to peer review for papers related to COVID-19 is very low.

> The rate of this proliferation also presents challenges to efforts to summarize and synthesize existing literature, which are necessary given the volume.

Reviewer: This is an important point to emphasize here an maybe elsewhere.  There have been related efforts to review COVID-19 preprints (which we should search for an cite).  We can explain why our project goes beyond reviewing preprints and the advantages of summarizing and synthesizing a massive amount of preprints, news stories, and journal publications.

Author: That sounds great! I can definitely add this.

Any static review is likely to quickly become dated as more research is released or, in some cases, retracted or superseded.
However, the complex nature of COVID-19 means that significant advantages can be gained from examining the virus and disease in a multidisciplinary context.
Therefore, this problem lends itself well to a crowd-sourced approach to writing through open collaboration.
While typically such efforts might rely on WYSIWYG tools such as Google Docs, recent advances in open publishing have created an infrastructure that facilitates distributed, version-controlled collaboration on manuscripts [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128].
Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128] is a collaborative framework developed to adapt open-source software development techniques and version control for manuscript writing.

> It allows for manuscripts to be managed and maintained using GitHub, a popular, online version control interface that also provides the infrastructure via continuous integration (CI) to incorporate code into the manuscript building process to allow, for example, figures to be continuously updated based on an external data set..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows for manuscripts to be managed and maintained using GitHub, a popular, online version control interface that also provides the infrastructure via continuous integration (CI) to incorporate code into the manuscript building process to allow, for example, figures to be continuously updated based on an external data set.
```

However, these tools are not typically associated with biomedical research, yet synthesis and discussion of the emerging literature by biomedical scientists and clinicians would be expected to provide novel insights into how various areas of COVID-19 research intersect.

Here, we describe efforts to develop Manubot to handle an extreme case study in open, collaborative scientific writing: developing reviews of eight topics pertaining to the COVID-19 pandemic.

> The goal of the COVID-19 Collaborative Review community was to consolidate information about the virus in the context of related viruses and to synthesize rapidly emerging literature centered on the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The goal of the COVID-19 Review Consortium was to consolidate information about the virus in the context of related viruses and to synthesize rapidly emerging literature centered on the diagnosis and treatment of COVID-19.
```
This is the name we use in the author list

We designed software to generate figures that automatically update using external data sources. <!-- TODO: replace figure reference with manuscript reference or reference figure conditionally based on template variable [, such as Figure @fig:csse-deaths,] -->
Our primary goal was to provide the backend for scientists to sort and distill informative content out of the overwhelming flood of information [@doi:10.1038/s42254-020-0175-7] and help the broader scientific community become more conversant on this critical subject.
Thus, our approach has been to develop a real-time, collaborative effort that welcomes submissions from scientists worldwide into this ongoing effort.
This case study demonstrates the value of open collaborative writing tools such as Manubot to emerging crises such as COVID-19.
By allowing us to keep a record of the evolution of information over time and to create figures and in-line text that autoupdated alongside the state of the world, it revealed the particular value that Manubot holds for managing a rapid changes in scientific thought.

### Methods

#### Description of the Problem

> <!--To Do: Plot the number of pubs in CORD-19 over time?-->

Reviewer: A plot like this - growth of preprints and/or published manuscripts - would be nice.  It could be the first part of Results instead of Methods.

As many other efforts have described, the rate of publishing of formal manuscripts and preprints about COVID-19 was unprecedented [@doi:10.1053/j.ackd.2020.08.003].
Additionally, the broader topic of COVID-19 intersects with a wide range of fields, including virology, immunology, medicine, pharmacology, evolutionary biology, public health, and more.
Therefore, any effort to comprehensively document and evaluate this body of literature would require insight from scientists across a number of fields.
Furthermore, during the initial phase of the COVID-19 pandemic during spring and summer 2020, and much longer in some part of the world, many biological scientists were unable to access their research spaces.

> As a result, early career researchers (ECR) and students were likely to lose out on valuable time for conducting experiments. <!--To Do: look at equity analyses of the effects on the pandemic to see if there is any data on this yet?-->

Reviewer: Manubot provided a way for all contributors, including ECRs, to join a massive collaborative projects but also demonstrate their individual contributions to the larger work.

Interested parties were encouraged to contribute in a number of ways.
One option was to submit articles of interest as issues in the GitHub repository.
Articles were classified as _diagnostic_, _therapeutic_, or _other_, and a template was developed to guide the review of papers and preprints in each category.
Following a framework often used for assessing medical literature, the review consisted of examining methods used in each relevant article, assignment (whether the study was observational or randomized), assessment, results, interpretation, and how well the study extrapolates [@doi:10.5014/ajot.60.4.367].
For examples of each template, please see Appendices B-D.
Another option was to contribute or edit text using GitHub's pull request system.
Each pull request was reviewed and approved by at least one other author.

> Manubot also provides a functionality to create a bibliography using digital object identifiers (DOIs), website URLs, or other identifiers such as PubMed identifiers and arXiv IDs.

Reviewer: This could be moved to a separate section about how Manubot's automation is helpful for a massive collaborative review.  Contributors don't need to spend time adding reference metadata or watching for conflicts in metadata.  That could also link to our new need for citing clinical trials.

> The GitHub implementation allowed users to contribute either using git on the command line or using the GitHub user interface, and we developed documentation for users with less experience with this platform.

Reviewer: The documentation is a good contribution in itself.  Should we link it?  Describe it more (space permitting)?

> Few researchers in biological and medical fields are trained in version control tools such as git <!--To Do: Find some sort of reference for this, software carpentry?-->

Reviewer: A nice article but it isn't supporting what you say here https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004668

Maybe something [citing it](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?cites=11154469807022103800&as_sdt=5,50&sciodt=0,50&hl=en) would be more appropriate?

> The current project was managed through GitHub [@url:https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review] using Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128] to continuously generate a version of the manuscript online [@url:https://greenelab.github.io/covid19-review].

Reviewer: Somewhere we should have a paragraph about the benefits of a frequently updated HTML manuscript as opposed to a static PDF.  scite integration is one advantage.  Cross-referencing cited preprints with their reviews in the appendix is another.

As a result, we expanded upon the baseline Manubot training materials in an effort to guide efforts by scientists with no background in GitHub or version control to contribute.
<!--To Do: Short description of efforts to develop additional training resources-->

The data regarding contributions was analyzed using GitHub's continuous integration features.
<!--To Do: Describe how all the graphs we decide to go with were made, see results for ideas-->

> #### Applying Manubot to COVID-19 

Reviewer: We should emphasize that we were not just applying Manubot as-is.  The demands of this review and its scale required software, infrastructure, and workflow improvements.  For this type of conference, we should emphasize the methods development and contributions.

I now noticed you already have this explicit section below.  Perhaps we want to still rephrase this header to stress that the figure automation was all a new development as well.

Because of the ever-evolving nature of the COVID-19 crisis, many of the figures and text proposed by subject matter contributors would have quickly become outdated.
To address this concern, Manubot and GitHub's continuous integration features were used to create figures and text that could respond to changes in the COVID-19 pandemic over time.
The combination of Manubot and GitHub Actions also made it possible to dynamically update information such as statistics and visualizations in the manuscript.

> When scientific writers added text that was current only as of a given date, publicly available data sources were identified whenever possible to allow the information to pulled directly into the manuscript in order to keep it up-to-date.

Reviewer: Quoted examples can help clarify what we mean by this.

> Data was pulled from a number of sources.

Reviewer: If we had more time, this would be a good candidate for a figure illustrating the workflow.  It is pretty confusing how the auto-updates and figure versioning works.  I could help sketch this but don't have good graphic design skills.

The template variables also include versioned URLs to the dynamically updated figures.
The JSON files and figures are stored in the `external-resources` branch of the manuscript's GitHub repository, which acts as versioned storage.
The GitHub Actions workflow automatically adds and commits the new JSON files and figures to the `external-resources` branch every time it runs, and Manubot uses the latest version of these resources when it builds the manuscript.
The workflow file is available from <https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review/blob/master/.github/workflows/update-external-resources.yaml> and the scripts are available from <https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review/tree/external-resources>.
The Python package versions are available in <https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review/blob/external-resources/environment.yml>.

> <!-- To Do: These files are archived with [Software Heritage](...). -->

Reviewer: Software Heritage failed to archive this repository when I tried last year.  We may need to use Zenodo or something else.

Author: This was in the draft manuscript so I just moved it here! But definitely happy to change to whatever works!

Additionally, the fast-moving nature of the infodemic has led to a number of retractions and corrections of COVID-19 literature.

> <!--To Do: Describe integration with scite -- unless this should go in the section below? Ask Vince -->  

Reviewer: I think we should take credit for any general Manubot improvements (like scite integration and spellchecking) in this paper and invite the relevant Manubot contributors as authors on this paper.

Reviewer: Yes, I added most of the spell checking.  Daniel helped improve it when we migrated it from the prototype in this repo to the rootstock version.

<!-- To Do: Also, if we end up automating the Manubot-to-LaTeX workflow while trying to submit this paper, we should describe that too-->
Due to the needs of this project, project contributors also implemented new features in Manubot and [Zotero](https://www.zotero.org/), which Manubot uses to extract metadata for some types of citations.
These features support directly citing clinical trial identifiers such as `clinicaltrials:NCT04292899` [@clinicaltrials:NCT04292899] and generating the complete review manuscript along with the individual manuscripts reviewing specific topics. <!-- To Do: reference individual manuscripts -->

<!--To Do: This is old text, separate out into intro what was pre-existing and here what was added over the course of this project-->
Finally, Manubot and GitHub Actions continuous integration allowed for scripted updates to be run each time the manuscript was generated.
These scripts were used to check that the manuscript was built correctly, run spellchecking, and cross-reference the manuscripts cited in this review, summarized in Appendix A, and discussed in the project's issues and pull requests.

### Results

#### Recruitment and Community Building

> <!--To Do: Add a graph/text describing number of unique contributors & commits over time-->

Reviewer: For this type of conference, we should include a Results section in addition to the Methods.  I haven't checked the template, but I assume that will be expected.

Our major claim is that Manubot successfully facilitated a massive collaborative review on an urgent topic.  Our Results section can provide a qualitative and quantitative assessment to support that claim.  I noted above that the growth of the literature could be one initial result to demonstrate the problem (and perhaps the grown of clinical trials, treatments, etc. as well).  Other quantitative results could include:
- unique contributors and commits over time, as noted in the comment
- growth of the manuscript over time (we could try regenerating [this figure](https://greenelab.github.io/meta-review/#fig:contrib) summarizing deep review growth)
- growth of paper issues over time
- distribution of review contents, that is, something showing the number of comments per pull request that was merged
- growth of the reference list over time and/or number of clinical trials cited (because we describe that as a necessary enhancement)
- example of how the auto-updated figures changed between an early version and most recent version to demonstrate the importance of having current data visualized

Is there anything else along these lines we could include in a Results section?  Most of my suggestions are plots showing something getting bigger over time, which is okay but not the most exciting data.

We could have a summary figure showing all of the external data sources that are integrated into the manuscript.  We have icons for MSSM reviews, JHU data, etc. at the top.  That flows into a GitHub repo, which also takes input from all the contributors.  Then the output of the repo is the manuscript and other CI artifacts.

<!-- To Do: Word Cloud of #17 to show diversity of interests?-->
<!--To Do: plot number of article issues opened over time-->

#### Data Analysis and Integration

<!--To Do: I guess the result here would be just to provide the code that generates the figures? Depending on mSystems licensing, perhaps we can provide an example?-->

> ### Conclusions

Author: @mprobson I haven't updated these, just moved the existing text. Conclusions will depend on what we do above! However, I did drop some blockchain links for you 😆

Reviewer 2: Do we know why the first one was retracted? I don't think the second one is actually blockchain based but rather focused on repeatability/reliability in code (and input data).

Reviewer: It was retracted because Daniel Himmelstein showed they could not actually prove their protocol existed as originally claimed.  The [manuscript comments](https://f1000research.com/articles/5-222#article-comments) summarize this, and there is more detail in Daniel's [blog](https://blog.dhimmel.com/irreproducible-timestamps/).

I'll give it more thought, but getting into blockchain for data provenance feels out of scope for this particular manuscript.

Author: Sorry @agitter, I was partially joking because @mprobson's students are all presenting about blockchain this semester, and he's sick of talking about it. I just thought it was funny that people are worried about blockchain for data provenance in medicine when there is so, so much else we could be doing for reproducibility (like making code for figures available, i.e., manubot!) If it is included, it would just be a throwaway comment -- those articles are the primary type of thing that came up when I was searching for open publishing in medicine, and it just seems like a really weird emphasis for the literature to be taking based on all the work that could be done!

Reviewer: Ha, got it.  Ironically, Manubot actually does use blockchain for provenance via OpenTimestamps
> Manubot supports OpenTimestamps to timestamp the HTML and PDF outputs on the Bitcoin blockchain. This procedure allows one to retrospectively prove that a manuscript version existed prior to its blockchain-verifiable timestamp

(from https://greenelab.github.io/meta-review/#timestamping)
